The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz and David Carson.
On this program we will be talking with author Larry Niven. Niven first appeared in print in 1964,
and by 1976 he had won the Hugo Award five times. He has written a set of stories set in what he calls
which are a series of stories with a common background. He has also written several novels and stories
not related to the known space series. Aside from science fiction, Niven has written a fantasy
called The Magic Goes Away and co-authored with Jerry Pranell, a science fiction rendering of Dante's Inferno,
entitled appropriately enough, Inferno. Other collaborations with Jerry Pranell include
A Moat in God's Eye and the bestseller Lucifer's Hammer.
Here's my first question to you Mr. Niven. I'd like to ask if you classify yourself as a hard science fiction writer
in the tradition of Hal Clement?
If you've got the class of Jaime, that's where I sit, yes. I would, I suppose all writers resist classification as best they can.
I do other things too. Fantasy. Considerable fantasy, a great deal more hard science fiction,
not much in the way of soft science fiction. Articles, speeches, I'm the guy who did a study of the medical problems
of breeding Kryptonians called Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex, and I just published the only venture
I've ever made into economics, a method which would also solve the problem of nuclear waste disposal.
The idea is to turn the nuclear waste into coins. A healthy economy is one in which the money circulates fast.
You mentioned that you had not written much in the area of soft science fiction. Do you think the new wave is past
that fans and writers are turning back to strongly science-oriented stories?
Yes, I do. However, the new wave was very good to me. When I was first getting started, I was the only new hard science fiction writer.
The new wave is a very persuasive thing and very easy to use to justify bad stories. I think that's what killed it.
Not that increased characterization and experiments with typography and story format are a bad thing in themselves,
but it's so easy to use new wave to justify a bad story. It was bound to go out.
How did you begin writing science fiction? Were you always a science fiction reader, a fan?
Yes, and presently I found I was making up daydreaming stories that seemed worth writing.
Did you tell the stories to others before you gained enough confidence to write them down?
Yes, I've been a storyteller all my life.
Do you have a large and involved fan following? Do you ever write specifically for them or do you write only what you want to?
I mostly write for myself, for an imaginary reader who resembles me a great deal. Only he needs things explained to him.
Beyond that, I sell it where I can and pick up readers where I can.
Let's turn to your known space series for a moment. How did you get started writing a future history?
Well, there had been future histories around. Poole Anderson and Robert Heinlein.
I tell you, I guess we each evolved the idea somewhat independently.
The idea is that if you carved out a consistent, workable future, it seems a shame to waste it on one story.
You put in the background because you want the background of a story to seem bigger than it is.
So there are things that are simply unexplained.
And if you think of more to say on a given subject, why you go with it?
And if you think of a story that fits into the background of a previous story and allows you to elaborate on that background,
sometimes you fall in love with the background and presently you've got a bunch of stories that link.
In the afterward of Ringworld Engineers, you said that your known space series was completed.
Is that still true and if so, why?
I've given up saying that the known space series is dating. There's just no point in it.
I've written five books worth of known space stories since I said that.
And besides that, I have no doubt that I'll come up with stories said in the Gildly Arms Times.
I like writing science fiction detective stories. It's just hard work. I do not have a detective story in my head.
It'll have to work. But that's the beginning of known space and I'll continue to work with it where it looks like fun.
You have, as you mentioned, written science fiction detective stories and you've experimented with humor in science fiction.
Is there any subject area that you think can't be handled well in the science fiction genre?
No, I can't think of any. I guess I go along with the idea that there are these interlocked circles to represent various areas of fiction.
They all swim in the sea of fantasy.
Science fiction probably includes the entire portion of fantasy that is possible.
And mainstream would be somewhere in there and nurse novels would be somewhere in that.
There would be no subject you could treat in English that couldn't be treated in a science fiction format except fantasy and that would be treated in a fantasy format.
Probably your best known work in the known space series is Ringworld. Can you tell us how that concept came about?
Oh, I ran across the concept Dyson Sphere. Dyson the mathematician came up with the concept Dyson Shell and he was misunderstood to some extent.
So presently I ran across an article about Dyson Sphere.
I picture that as a golf ball 93 million miles in radius with a sun at the center and gravity generators all around the outside so you would live on the inside,
tariff on it with oceans and soil and air.
I ran across that and I didn't like it. I thought it could be improved and I wound up with the Ringworld.
Freeman Dyson in commenting on your adaptation of his idea said that a great number of small Ringworlds would be better than the large one that you had.
Believe I gave an acceptable answer to that in the Ringworld engineers, but in general he'd be right.
It's just that the Ringworld engineers in particular are people who like dependable weapons of huge size.
Many of your fans pointed out a number of mistakes and made many elaborations on the concept of the Ringworld.
Can you tell us what some of them were and how they were corrected or worked into the sequel?
For instance, I suspected the Ringworld was unstable and I suspected you'd need attitude jets.
I was sure that the Ringworld was spinning fast enough to permit Bazar-Ramjet to be used as attitude jets,
which means you don't have a fuel problem at all. You're burning the solar wind.
But rapidly some MIT people demonstrated that the Ringworld was unstable and they were chanting it in the hall at the next Worldcon.
The Ringworld is unstable. The Ringworld is unstable.
It still took about seven years for anyone to figure out the exact numbers for the instability and they are horrifying.
A major solar flare would have the Ringworld grinding against its sun in five years.
Well, I worked in the plot. That was one elaboration or error.
Another just can't be correct. It seems that there's too much twilight with the shadow squares set up the way I have them set up.
You get too much of neither day nor night but twilight half the sun showing, part of the sun showing.
The shadow squares ought to be set up with about five big shadow squares moving in a retrograde world.
That way you get day and night setting much faster when it sets.
Terminator line moves like a bat out of hell. It's still a little fuzzy, but it doesn't matter.
Third point, somebody pointed out that the tensile strength necessary to hold the Ringworld together is on the order of the tensile strength of an atomic nucleus.
It's a super strong force.
Okay, I can live with that. I can postulate that. I knew scrypte would have to be stronger than any normal material already.
Fourth point, some high school class in Florida got to work on the Ringworld.
And their conclusion was that the Ringworld's worst problem is that all the top soil would wind up in the oceans in about 3,000 years.
There are no earthquakes on the Ringworld. No mountain building forces.
Okay, that's a tough one. I set up a spill pipe system that runs the sea bottom mark from the sea bottoms under the Ringworld and up over the edge of the Ringwall.
That even allows you some mines, accumulation of useful metals.
What else? Checking in my head, I find Frank Gisperic's suggestion that a machine building culture on the Ringworld which reached our level wouldn't have any petroleum products to use.
They would wind up using alcohol, where we use gasoline.
And fine, I can live with that. As a matter of fact, the sludge from making alcohol for automobiles, the sludge can be used to make plastics, maybe plastic like substances, maybe.
The chemicals are just as elaborate as the residues from petroleum. What else?
Still checking in my head, I pick up on other things I can't use such as Dan Alderson's solar system, which involves four Ringworlds.
He's got three Ringworlds about the size of mine rotating orthogonally on frictionless bearings.
And the fourth Ringworld is about the size of the orbit of Jupiter and inhabited by mesplanites.
Mesplanites derived from a novel by Hal Klement, Mission of Gravity.
And mesplanites require cold temperatures about those of the orbit of Jupiter as opposed to Jupiter, which has an internal source.
Cold temperatures and heavy gravity. So his fourth Ringworld is the size of the orbit of Jupiter and spinning like a bat out of hell.
I had it figured out that if they spun that Ringworld any faster, it would get nearer the speed of light and contract.
Dan says I've misunderstood relativity, it would not contract. Okay, I still haven't figured out why not.
Well, you obviously enjoy playing the game as how clinic calls it between your own scientific knowledge and that of your readers and peers.
Absolutely. I incorporated everything that sounded good that I could use in elaborating the design of the Ringworld.
What do you think about the current ideas for space habitats that are proposed by Gerardo Neal and others?
I think they are grandiose and I certainly wouldn't stop him. But the space program seems to have fallen flat on its face at this point.
We will have trouble reaching the moon again. Getting back to the moon is as big a problem as we can face.
I resent having to say that, but I believe it's true.
Let's turn for a moment to another of your novels, one written with Jerry Brunel, The Mode in God's Eye.
How do you go about constructing an alien like the Moedys? Were you influenced by anyone in that area?
The Moedys were, no, not in that case. In that case, I had the idea that I was following a progression with a protozoan with an amoeba.
You get radial symmetry inside and out. Move up a goodly distance and you find starfishes with radial symmetry on the outside and bilateral symmetry on the inside.
Move up a little further and you find flat worms and worms of all stance.
At the level of bilateral symmetry inside and out, go as far as a human and you find bilateral symmetry on the outside and no symmetry, well, half symmetrical on the inside.
The lungs look symmetrical, the kidneys look symmetrical, the intestines look like somebody dropped a plate of spaghetti.
I tried to move on to the next step, bilaterally unsymmetrical on the outside and I got the original Moody, which was the engineer for me.
But I always design aliens for themselves. I almost never design an alien to match a story.
The story, some story will eventually include the alien. The alien stands for itself.
I think that one of the outstanding aspects of the Moedys was their non-use of standardized machines. They would create whatever replacement parts that they needed on the spot.
Do you recall what caused you to think along those lines for your alien society?
I was just playing along. I was just playing with the ideas at that point and that one seemed like a fun one.
It also seemed likely enough if you've got a critter with not much intelligence except in the direction of tool making and tool altering, then why not?
The thing has to keep testing its ability or it will lose it. It might as well be designing something every time it needs a specific machine.
The master can always stop it and have it reducing as if by assembly lines. If a master needs a lot of something fast.
In Ringworld you developed something called the Tila Brown gene. Humans spread to be lucky. Was that just a story gimmick or were you extrapolating on the evolution of humanity?
Partly that and partly you've got to remember the time I was writing. I was damn sick and tired of psychic powers showing up in stories.
I did not believe in psychic powers at that time. I've been told they look pretty good now.
But at the time I can see the Tila Brown gene as being the ultimate psychic power which you may interpret either as luck or as author control.
In that sense it was something of a put on except that I can believe almost anything while I'm writing the story and I am able to extrapolate.
So if Tila Brown is lucky certain things emerge and if she's just a statistical fool then something else emerges and that's that people will interpret anything that happens to her as luck.
Defending their preconception.
What do you consider to be your best work or your favorite work?
No I couldn't tell you that. There is no way I can name a favorite work. My career is a progression for one thing.
Take any novel or any important short story even out of that progression and it wanders away in a different direction.
So I don't think I have a favorite story but I suppose I can name Inconton Moon which is virtually the only strictly love story I've ever done.
And I suppose I could name Lucifer's Hammer which made me the most money.
So a moat in God's eye may be that. I suppose I could name oh Man of Steel Woman of Kleenex which has gotten me the most laughs I suppose.
Everybody seems to have read it and those who haven't have heard of out of the cocktail party.
Or what?
Jerry Purnell and I just recently wrote The Last Ten Minutes for a movie that had a good 90 minutes followed by a bad last 10 minutes.
The last I've heard is they're not going to make the movie which is a dirty shame.
That is they're not going to make the last 10 minutes hour away. They're going to fiddle with what they've got.
And that's a really dirty shame. What they've got is garbage.
I really hope they use that last 10 minutes and if they do I will get considerable enjoyment out of that and that will be my favorite you name it.
You mentioned your collaboration with Jerry Purnell. Which do you prefer, writing alone or with another author?
I prefer variety. I even prefer variety in my collaborators.
I just finished a novel with a Stephen Barnes and we're starting another.
A short one. And Jerry and I are starting another almost instantly.
A novel about...
Well we've designed an alien that could invade the Earth and also would want...
It's tough to get an alien whom you could believe would want to invade the Earth from another star.
Considering the distances involved and the energy involved.
And the penalties for failure and the lack of the unlikelihood that it will do your home planet any good if you conquer something that is six light years away.
Anyway we've designed one and we will be writing a novel about that.
When writing in collaboration is it difficult to decide who writes what?
Hard sometimes but it always resolves.
The question is who is most qualified to write a given scene that we have both decided needs writing.
Before we start we have the novel all laid out.
We know what's going in virtually everywhere and if we don't it feels like we do.
And if we find out we don't we elaborate as we get to that section.
Okay the next question is who is qualified to write a given scene.
Sometimes it's obvious. If we're dealing with a madman he's mine.
If we're dealing with military operations it's Jerry.
Aliens are generally mine. Politics is generally Jerry's.
Knowledge of history generally Jerry's.
And a real evil son of a bitch Jerry usually creates him and I usually run with him afterwards.
Because Jerry has a lot of textbooks on psychology and PhD in psychology for that matter.
Sorry doctorate in psychology.
And when he's created a really evil son of a bitch he just hates him too much to work with him.
I can usually do something. Horace Berry went that way and the rapist in Lucie's hammer.
And a couple of the characters in Inferno.
I understand that both you and Mr. Penel use computer word processors. How does that aid in your writing?
It makes first draft a little faster but it makes corrections enormously faster.
You get a more polished novel when I'm using word processors.
It's polishing is just like sinking into the machine almost.
The word processor seems like a magic typewriter. It does everything you would want a typewriter to do only it can.
It can't erase full blocks of print at a time and then straighten up the page so it looks like you never made any corrections.
But a word processor can do just that. And move blocks up and down the page. Up and down the manuscript.
What do you think Mr. Nevin is the future of science fiction?
Has fantasy begun taking over or is there a lot more hard science fiction to come?
Hard to say. For one thing writers in general don't take orders where they're damn.
The science fiction field is galloping off in all directions just as it always has.
And the reader will make the final decision in most cases.
What will be successful, it will depend on who buys what book.
It's always been true.
I understand that some of your works were involved several years ago with the animated Star Trek series. How did that come about?
Oh it went like this. They were going to start a Star Trek cartoon.
And the lady who was story editor got me involved.
I tried to give them a story that involved a mini black hole and an outsider ship.
I had the idea that Star Trek had been using many rubber suits for so long that they wouldn't realize how much more freedom they had with the animated version.
That turns out not to be the case. They had some very good ideas.
But that story turned out to be a little over the heads of their intended audience.
So I want, it did incidentally wind up as the first version of the last part of a story called Order of the Soul.
So I eventually wound up meeting Gene Roddenberry and he wound up suggesting why don't I take a story called Soft Weapon and turn it into a Star Trek version.
And I did that and called it the Slaver Weapon.
And fine, they eventually made a cartoon out of it. They also sold the right to turn that cartoon script into a story. They sold that to Ballantyne.
I got mildly upset. The president of the Civil, who was Jerry Brunel at the time, got seriously upset and started making as many waves as he could.
And what eventually happened was that they sent me a dollar for a check for two dollars and something, something, something, somewhere between two and three dollars.
And Jerry, I don't know where the negotiations went, but Jerry wound up saying, OK, that defends the principle of the thing. We'll ask for more next time.
And that's that for some years. By then I had written to Ballantyne and gotten a letter from Betty Ballantyne saying, hey, we won't ever use it. We promise, we see you're upset. We promise we won't ever do anything with this.
A little later, the Ballantyne's got out of the Ballantyne Books business and into the business of printing illustrated stuff.
And Judy Lindell Ray wound up in charge. And presently, presently I'm being offered two thousand bucks as advisors to Alan Dean Foster, who will turn my script into a novel.
And I said, fine, what I really meant was acceptable. A few months later, I've got a letter from Judy Lind dropping the price to five hundred and I pulled my top.
I said, A, I won't collaborate with you or Alan on anything of the kind. And B, you may not use anything from known space except what's in the script. And that is the way it happened.
Are there any plans for Motion Picture or Television Adaptations of any of your works in the near future?
Yes, there are. I just don't know how far they are going to go. But there is a group that owns an option on death by ecstasy and a guy who owns an option on the modian God's eye.
And let's see, I've got a friend trying to get a public broadcasting system to make a TV version of Lucifer of In Constant Moon, which would be nice, all of which would be nice.
Are there any contemporary writers that you particularly enjoy reading?
Yes, I agree, many. Ursula Le Guin, John Varley, Poo Anderson, Jerry Pornell. How far do we go with this? I like the old ones and I like the new ones.
I like about half of Harlan Ellison's stories, which is a better record than many writers have. I like a few of Bill Dick's stories. And I will probably buy the Last of the Dursire books by Gordie Dixon.
In fact, it's Dan's certain I will read it. I'll buy it if it doesn't come free. I swamped in free books. I'm a Piers Anthony fan. I don't know how numerous we Piers Anthony fans are. I like the puzzles in his books.
And his books are always jammed with puzzles and new ways of thinking and so forth.
One last question. I don't suppose those Piers and puppeteers ever stuck you the formula for the general products whole, did they?
No, I don't have the formula for the general products, though, but I have reason to suspect the pair of puppeteers on Earth. Look at the characteristics. Forget the shape. They must be masters of biology to hide that peculiar three-legged two-headed shape.
But consider their characteristics. They are cowards. That is, they want everything utterly safe. No corners on anything. Everything is soft surfaces around the puppeteer world. They don't even keep their world near a sun.
Regarding it as a runaway fusion reactor, which of course it is. So, desperate regard for safety, they plus an urge to meddle in the lifestyles of other species. Driving urge to meddle with practically no restraints attached. What does that remind you of? It seems nearly certain to me that Ralph Nader is a Piersan's puppet here.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, in conjunction with KOCV FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.